docs: add orchestration playbook and fix rotation (#292)
sigstore/root-signing: playbooks/ORCHESTRATION.md

# Orchestration

This playbook describes how to orchestrate a root signing event.

## Pre-work

1. Check the [calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/0?cid=Y19ydjIxcDJuMzJsbmJoYW5uaXFwOXIzNTJtb0Bncm91cC5jYWxlbmRhci5nb29nbGUuY29t) for upcoming root signing events. 

2. Make updates to the targets and delegation configuration files, see [configuration](#targets-and-delegation-configuration).

> 3. Double-check the configured [role expirations](https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing/blob/e3f1fe5e487984f525afc81ac77fa5ce39737d0f/cmd/tuf/app/init.go#L28).

Reviewer: Not for docs, but can this be a part of a pre-verification step somewhere in the scripts?

Author: Adding this here to track for v5: https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing/issues/98

But I might be misunderstanding what you mean.

Reviewer: Yea, I was thinking that a verification script can check for these exact expirations.

4. Set environment variables, including previous repository and online signer references (details [here](#key-configuration)). 

| Variable      | Description | Example |
| ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | 
| GITHUB_USER      | The GitHub user, used to create PRs and commit messages       | asraa       |

> | BRANCH   | The working branch, in case of staging script or configuration changes.        | main        |

Reviewer: Does BRANCH and LOCAL have to be set always, I thought those were just for testing?

Author: "If enabled" &  "in case of staging script or configuration changes", i tried to make that clear? added "testing"/optional

Reviewer 2: Perhaps just start the description with "(Optional, used when...)"?

Author: Yep! marked as optional in the update

| LOCAL   | If enabled, keeps git state dirty and does not create pull requests. Used to run root signing locally for testing.       |         |

> | REPO   | Specifies the repository folder, see [Configuration](#configuration)       |   `ceremony/2022-02-22`      |

Reviewer: Should you also mention needing to set this if you're doing the signing across multiple days, since the date changes?

Author: These are all variables that need to be set unless indicated, so I think that's clear? I did add that by default it chooses the current date.

This might not even be a ceremony/date repo -- could also be `repository/repository`.

* A `repository/` subfolder containing the finalized TUF repository metadata.
* A `staging/` subfolder present during root signing events with staged metadata before publishing.

### Targets and Delegation configuration

For top-level targets and delegation files, a YAML configuration file named `role-metadata.yml` specifies the target files for the role and their [custom metadata](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#custom). We use [Sigstore custom metadata](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore/blob/ec8f2d403e07a392ea363560d21c31aaee57ba0f/pkg/tuf/client.go#L95) to allow Sigstore clients to identity usage of the targets. Target files are customarily located in the [targets/] subfolder. For example, this defines the target file located at `targets/fulcio_v1.crt.pem` with custom metadata to indicate Fulcio root usage.

```yaml
targets/fulcio_v1.crt.pem:
  sigstore:
    usage: Fulcio
    status: Active

> ```

Reviewer: Not for docs: Another thing that might be useful to verify with a verification script, that usage and status are set for all targets

Author: Configuration verification sounds good.

Author: It's not necessary for usage and status to be set, however. It's optional.

Filed https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing/issues/294 to track

### Key configuration

There are two types of keys that are used during root signing. 

First, we use hardware Yubikeys for root and target signers. There are 5 [root keyholders](https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing#current-sigstore-root-keyholders) each containing one key. A [default threshold](https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing/blob/e3f1fe5e487984f525afc81ac77fa5ce39737d0f/cmd/tuf/app/init.go#L24) of 3 are required to sign the root and targets. This is configurable through a `threshold` flag on [initialization](#step-2-initializing-a-root-and-targets). Configuring the hardware keyholders is done through management of the `keys/` subfolder, see [Key Management](#step-1-root-key-updates) during the ceremony.

> Second, online keys on GCP are used for snapshot, timestamp, and delegation roles. These are defined by a [go-cloud](https://gocloud.dev) style URI to refer to the specific provider like `gcpkms://`. See cosign [KMS integrations](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/blob/main/KMS.md) for details. These are configured through environment variables in the `scripts/` which propogate to command line flags to the binary.

Reviewer: nit: propagate

> 

Reviewer: Do we need to record key rotations? There's an open question if we need to record all signing events. If trust is formed from the initial root, and that is recorded, that may be sufficient.

Author: > There's an open question if we need to record all signing events

All signing events are recorded in their ceremony/ directories, so I think if there's an online key rotation, the history will still be there. 

FWIW I don't think the scripts will automaticaly pick up on snapshot/timestamp rotations without some changes right now. I'll file for v5 https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing/issues/293

Reviewer: I meant recording over GVC, like what was done for the first ceremony. Do we need that step?

Author: Ah! I don't think so -- all the others are done asynchronously so I'm not sure what to record.

Reviewer: SG, agreed, I just wanted to check

```

You should expect to see their serial number key verified, which should match the committed subfolder.

### Revoking a Root Key

Remove the subfolder. This is done through the [initialization](#step-2-initializing-a-root-and-targets) script by passing the serial number as script argument. See below.

## Step 2: Initializing a root and targets

This step initializes or stages a new root and targets file according to the pre-work and configuration.  Any new key additions from [Step 1](#step-1-root-key-updates) will be picked up. If a key needs to be removed, pass it in as a parameter like follows:

```bash
./scripts/step-1.5.sh 123456
```
This copies over old repository metadata and keys from the `${PREV_REPO}`, revokes key `123456`, and then updates a new root and targets according to the configuration. The new PR will create a new `root.json`, `targets.json`, and delegation files in the `${REPO}/staged` subfolder. You should see the following directory structure created:
```
$REPO
├── keys
├── repository
└── staged
    ├── root.json
    ├── targets
    │   └── $TARGET
    ├── targets.json
    ├── staging.json
    ├── rekor.json   
    └── revocation.json 
```

> Manually check for:

Reviewer: I think a verification script for this step, where we just hardcode expirations and check for things like version+1-from-previous would be helpful.

Author: I need a human eyeball to check for this at some point though...

Or else I can compare against the expiration map, but that's where the info was populated from.

I guess the verifier is somewhat of a code boundary -- unless the orchestrator/verifier filled out their expectations I don't think I can automate this easily. File an issue if you have a clear vision?

* The expected root and targets expirations.
* The expected root and targets versions.
* The expected keyholders and placeholder signatures.
* The expected target and delegation files. Check the termination, paths, and targets on each delegation.

<!-- TODO: Add playbook for disaster/recovery steps. -->

### Hardware Key Signing

Next, the root and targets file must be signed. Ask each root keyholder to run:

```bash

> ./scripts/step-0.sh && ./scripts/step-2.sh

Reviewer: Is step-0 always necessary, or is it just so we know the state of the local repo?

Author: It's always necessary to build the binary. I added it here because I assume that the orchestrator has run step 0, but the the root keyholder may not have.

```

This will create the following structure.
```

> ${REPO}/keys

Reviewer: Is this in the correct place, shouldnt this be in step1?

Author: :P good catch.

```

and check that the delegation was successfully signed.

## Step 4: Snapshotting and Timestamping

Next, the metadata will need to be snapshotted and timestamped. Run 

```bash
./scripts/step-4.sh
```

This will create a PR signing the snapshot and timestamp files. Verify the expirations and the signatures:

```bash
./scripts/verify.sh $PR
```

## Step 5: Publishing

This final step will commit the TUF repository metadata and move it to the top-level folder `repository/repository/`.

```bash
./scripts/step-5.sh
```

This will create a PR moving the files. Verify that the TUF client can update to the new metadata with:

```bash
./scripts/verify.sh $PR
```

## Post-ceremony Steps

1. If any root keyholders have changed, update the [current root keyholders](https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing#current-sigstore-root-keyholders) with their name, key ID, and location of their key material.

2. If any targets have changed, update them and their usage in the table containing the [repository structure](https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing#tuf-repository-structure).

3. Announce the root rotation on twitter and the community meeting, and thank the keyholders!

> 4. Schedule the next root signing event 3 months from now on the calendar. The root expires in  months. Schedule a testing event for the week before.

Reviewer: 3 months? Or 5? Also missing the root expiration

Author: Ah! I'll specify one month before expiration (I forgot expiration is still at 6 months). I should prob avoid hard-coding expirations into the docs or else I'll forget to update

> 4. Schedule the next root signing event 3 months from now on the calendar. The root expires in  months. Schedule a testing event for the week before.

Reviewer 2: > The root expires in  months.

How many months? :-D

Author: Updated per Hayden's comments! For 1 month before expiration, and I linked to the expiration map here

### Other

> #### Adding a Delegation

Reviewer 2: A delegation added following these steps wouldn't become operational until the next signing ceremony. Is that expected? Should we add a sentence here?

Author: Ah, I see -- ordering is bad here. I'll link this section in pre-work:

```
2. Make updates to the targets and delegation configuration files, see [configuration](#targets-and-delegation-configuration). To add a delegation, see [Adding a Delegation](#adding-a-delegation).
```

1. Add an environment variable for the delegation key named `$DELEGATION_KEY` in [./scripts/step-1.5.sh].

2. Create a `./config/$DELEGATION-metadata`.yml file, see [Target and Delegation configuration](#targets-and-delegation-configuration). 

> 3. Add the delegation with the in [./scripts/step-1.5.sh] with a command like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Edit [./scripts/step-1.5.sh] to add the delegation after the root and targets are setup via `tuf init`, with a command like:
```
